Optimising burst based deep brain stimulation in a population model of Parkinson's disease and Tremor
######################################################################################################
:date: 2024-12-09 12:44:07
:author: Nada Yousif
:category: Seminars
:tags: 
:slug: 
:summary: Nada Yousif's Journal Club session where she will talk about "Optimising burst based deep brain stimulation in a population model of Parkinson's disease and Tremor".

On this week's Journal Club session, Nada Yousif will talk about her work in the presentation entitled "Optimising burst based deep brain stimulation in a population model of Parkinson's disease and Tremor".

------------

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a therapy used to treat several neurological conditions
such as Parkinson’s disease (PD) and essential tremor (ET), based on the implantation of
electrodes into specific brain targets. Despite its success, the electrical stimulus has
remained as a regular frequency square pulse for decades. Recently, there have been
proposals that phase-locking, coordinated reset or irregular stimulation patterns may be
more effective at desynchronising the pathological neural activity. Here we consider our
population level model of the thalamocortical-basal ganglia network, which generates
pathological oscillatory activity in the beta band (\textasciitilde20 Hz) associated with
PD and the tremor band (\textasciitilde4 Hz) associated with ET. We stimulate the model
with regular, irregular and phase-dependent bursts of DBS, and use an optimisation
technique to find the best stimulation parameters in each case. Our results show that
bursts can be as or more effective at suppressing pathological oscillations compared to
continuous DBS, allowing exploration of stimulation mechanisms to formulate testable
predictions regarding DBS.

|


**Date:**  2024/12/13 |br|
**Time:** 14:00 |br|
**Location**: Online

.. |br| raw:: html

	<br />
