CEPS: An Open Access MATLAB Graphical User Interface (GUI) for the Analysis of Complexity and Entropy in Physiological Signals
###############################################################################################################################
:date: 2024-03-02 19:04:26
:author: Deepak Panday
:category: Seminars
:tags: complexity, entropy, heart rate variability, HRV, paced breathing, softwar
:slug: 
:summary: Deepak Panday's Journal Club session where he will talk about his paper "CEPS: An Open Access MATLAB Graphical User Interface (GUI) for the Analysis of Complexity and Entropy in Physiological Signals".

On this week's Journal Club session, Deepak Panday will talk about his paper in the presentation entitled "CEPS: An Open Access MATLAB Graphical User Interface (GUI) for the Analysis of Complexity and Entropy in Physiological Signals".

------------

Background: We developed CEPS as an open access MATLAB® GUI (graphical user interface) for
the analysis of Complexity and Entropy in Physiological Signals (CEPS), and demonstrate
its use with an example data set that shows the effects of paced breathing (PB) on
variability of heart, pulse and respiration rates. CEPS is also sufficiently adaptable to
be used for other time series physiological data such as EEG (electroencephalography),
postural sway or temperature measurements. Methods: Data were collected from a convenience
sample of nine healthy adults in a pilot for a larger study investigating the effects on
vagal tone of breathing paced at various different rates, part of a development programme
for a home training stress reduction system. Results: The current version of CEPS focuses
on those complexity and entropy measures that appear most frequently in the literature,
together with some recently introduced entropy measures which may have advantages over
those that are more established. Ten methods of estimating data complexity are currently
included, and some 28 entropy measures. The GUI also includes a section for data pre-
processing and standard ancillary methods to enable parameter estimation of embedding
dimension m and time delay τ (‘tau’) where required. The software is freely available
under version 3 of the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPLv3) for non-commercial
users. CEPS can be downloaded from Bitbucket. In our illustration on PB, most complexity
and entropy measures decreased significantly in response to breathing at 7 breaths per
minute, differentiating more clearly than conventional linear, time- and frequency-domain
measures between breathing states. In contrast, Higuchi fractal dimension increased during
paced breathing. Conclusions: We have developed CEPS software as a physiological data
visualiser able to integrate state of the art techniques. The interface is designed for
clinical research and has a structure designed for integrating new tools. The aim is to
strengthen collaboration between clinicians and the biomedical community, as demonstrated
here by using CEPS to analyse various physiological responses to paced breathing.

|

Papers:

- D. Mayor, D. Panday, H. Kandel, T. Steffert, D. Banks, `"CEPS: An Open Access MATLAB Graphical User Interface (GUI) for the Analysis of Complexity and Entropy in Physiological Signals"
  <https://doi.org/10.3390/e23030321>`__, 2021, Entropy, 23, 321


**Date:**  2024/03/08 |br|
**Time:** 14:00 |br|
**Location**: C258 & online

.. |br| raw:: html

	<br />
