An ensemble learning algorithm for optimization of spark ignition engine performance fuelled with methane/hydrogen blends
##########################################################################################################################
:date: 2024-11-19 12:41:37
:author: Mohammad Tayaraninajaran
:category: Seminars
:tags: Ensemble learning, Evolutionary algorithms, Hydrogen, Methane, Spark ignition engine, Surrogate model
:slug: 
:summary: Mohammad Tayaraninajaran's Journal Club session where he will talk about "An ensemble learning algorithm for optimization of spark ignition engine performance fuelled with methane/hydrogen blends".

On this week's Journal Club session, Mohammad Tayaraninajaran will talk about his paper "An ensemble learning algorithm for optimization of spark ignition engine performance fuelled with methane/hydrogen blends".

------------

The increasing global demand for sustainable and cleaner transportation has led to
extensive research on alternative fuels for Internal Combustion (IC) engines. One
promising option is the utilization of methane/hydrogen blends in Spark-Ignition (SI)
engines due to their potential to reduce Green House Gas (GHG) emissions and improve
engine performance. However, the optimal operation of such an engine is challenging due to
the interdependence of multiple conflicting objectives, including Brake Mean Effective
Pressure (BMEP), Brake Specific Fuel Consumption (BSFC), and nitrogen oxide (NOx)
emissions. This paper proposes an evolutionary optimization algorithm that employs a
surrogate model as a fitness function to optimize methane/hydrogen SI engine performance
and emissions. To create the surrogate model, we propose a novel ensemble learning
algorithm that consists of several base learners. This paper employs ten different
learning algorithms diversified via the Wagging method to create a pool of base-learner
algorithms. This paper proposes a combinatorial evolutionary pruning algorithm to select
an optimal subset of learning algorithms from a pool of base learners for the final
ensemble algorithm. Once the base learners are designed, they are incorporated into an
ensemble, where their outputs are aggregated using a weighted voting scheme. The weights
of these base learners are optimized through a gradient descent algorithm. However, when
optimizing a problem using surrogate models, the fitness function is subject to
approximation uncertainty. To address this issue, this paper introduces an uncertainty
reduction algorithm that performs averaging within a sphere around each solution.
Experiments are performed to compare the proposed ensemble learning algorithm to the
classical learning algorithms and state-of-the-art ensemble algorithms. Also, the proposed
smoothing algorithm is compared with the state-of-the-art evolutionary algorithms.
Experimental studies suggest that the proposed algorithms outperform the existing
algorithms.

|

Papers:

- M. Tayarani-N., A. Paykani, `"An ensemble learning algorithm for optimization of spark ignition engine performance fuelled with methane/hydrogen blends"
  <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2024.112468>`__, 2024, Applied Soft Computing, 112468


**Date:**  2024/11/22 |br|
**Time:** 14:00 |br|
**Location**: SP4024A & online

.. |br| raw:: html

	<br />
